=== PAGE 1 ===
Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
This is the Published version of the following publication
Kovalchik, Stephanie (2016) Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction. 
Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 12 (3). 127 - 138. ISSN 1559-0410  
The publisher’s official version can be found at 
https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/jqas.2016.12.issue-3/jqas-2015-0059/jqas-2015-
0059.xml?format=INT
Note that access to this version may require subscription.
Downloaded from VU Research Repository  https://vuir.vu.edu.au/34652/ 

=== PAGE 2 ===
J. Quant. Anal. Sports 2016; 12(3): 127–138
*Corresponding author: Stephanie Ann Kovalchik, Tennis Australia, 
Melbourne Park, Olympic Blvd, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Victoria, 
Australia, Tel.: +61 4 5050 9098, e-mail: s.a.kovalchik@gmail.com; 
and Institute of Sport Exercise and Active Living, Victoria University, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Stephanie Ann Kovalchik*
Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
DOI 10.1515/jqas-2015-0059
Abstract: Sports forecasting models – beyond their interest 
to bettors – are important resources for sports analysts and 
coaches. Like the best athletes, the best forecasting models 
should be rigorously tested and judged by how well their 
performance holds up against top competitors. Although a 
number of models have been proposed for predicting match 
outcomes in professional tennis, their comparative perfor-
mance is largely unknown. The present paper tests the pre-
dictive performance of 11 published forecasting models for 
predicting the outcomes of 2395 singles matches during the 
2014 season of the Association of Tennis Professionals Tour. 
The evaluated models fall into three categories: regression-
based, point-based, and paired comparison models. Book-
maker predictions were used as a performance benchmark. 
Using only 1 year of prior performance data, regression mod-
els based on player ranking and an Elo approach developed 
by FiveThirtyEight were the most accurate approaches. The 
FiveThirtyEight model predictions had an accuracy of 75% 
for matches of the most highly-ranked players, which was 
competitive with the bookmakers. The inclusion of career-
to-date improved the FiveThirtyEight model predictions for 
lower-ranked players (from 59% to 64%) but did not change 
the performance for higher-ranked players. All models were 
10–20 percentage points less accurate at predicting match 
outcomes among lower-ranked players than matches with 
the top players in the sport. The gap in performance accord-
ing to player ranking and the simplicity of the information 
used in Elo ratings highlight directions for further model 
development that could improve the practical utility and 
generalizability of forecasting in tennis.
Keywords: betting; probit models; sports forecasting; 
validation.
1  Introduction
Predicting wins is a preoccupation of every sport. Tennis 
is no exception. For over a century, individuals have 
been fascinated and perplexed by the problem of fore-
casting match outcomes of the most popular of racquet 
sports, as is evident in this commentary from the 1898 
issue of the Lawn Tennis Guide concerning the likely 
outcome of that year’s draw for the Canadian Interna-
tional Tournament,
‘It would have puzzled the canniest card in the business all the 
same to pick a winner out of these gentleman, any one of which 
was liable to develop a streak and win out.’
Real progress in tackling the “puzzle” of tennis forecast -
ing began only decades ago with the publication of the 
first mathematical models to predict match outcomes. 
Since that time, many more models have been developed 
and interest in statistical approaches to forecasting wins 
in tennis has continued to grow.
Although multiple statistical models now exist for 
predicting tennis wins, few have been rigorously tested 
or compared against alternative approaches. Just as in 
sport itself, a high standard of performance should be 
the ultimate goal of a prediction model. However, there is 
currently little known about the validity and comparative 
utility of existing forecasting models.
The purpose of the present paper was to study the per-
formance of published models that predict singles match 
outcomes in professional tennis. The accuracy and dis -
criminatory power of 11 different forecasting approaches 
were evaluated in a large dataset of singles match out -
comes for the 2014 season of the Association of Tennis 
Professionals (ATP) Tour. Performance differences by type 
of surface and tournament level were also investigated. 
Through the comparative validation of existing prediction 
models, this study aims to identify the major determinants 
of win ability in professional tennis and highlight ways to 
improve the performance of existing models.
2   Review of tennis prediction 
models
2.1  Notation
The symbol πij will be used to denote the probability that 
the ith player wins a tennis match when facing the jth 
opponent. The player with the higher ranking, according 
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 3 ===
128      S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
to ATP Emirates World Rankings at the time of the match, 
will be designated as the ith player.
2.2  Models
A literature review was conducted to identify published 
models for forecasting wins in tennis. The first stage of 
the search strategy queried Google Scholar for articles 
containing “tennis” and at least one word containing 
“predict” or “forecast.” Hits were reviewed for relevance. 
Articles were considered relevant if they mentioned a 
strategy for match prediction in the abstract. In the second 
stage of the review process, the citations of the relevant 
articles were also reviewed.
From this search strategy, 17 articles underwent a 
detailed reading to determine their eligibility. Articles 
were excluded that did not present enough information to 
predict match wins (2 articles), did not present a forecast-
ing model (2 articles), presented a previously published 
model (2 articles), or required within-match updating (1 
article). Ten articles remained after applying these exclu -
sion criteria. In addition to the models identified in the 
literature, there was one additional prediction method 
developed by analysts at FiveThirtyEight (www.fivethir -
tyeight.com) that, owing to its popularity and reproduc -
ibility, was also included.
The models included in the validation study are 
described in Table 1. The majority of approaches fall into 
three categories of models: regression, point-based, and 
paired comparison models. Regression models directly 
model the winner of the match, and most proposed 
approaches within this class have been based on the probit 
family and included player rankings as a predictor. Point-
based approaches model the probability of winning on 
serve, then derive a prediction for the match outcome from 
an algebraic formula under the assumption that points are 
independent and identically distributed (IID). The point-
based models extend the earliest approach to implement-
ing the IID model, where only a player’s average ability 
on serve was utilized (Newton and Keller 2005), using 
more sophisticated models for the probabilities of winning 
a point on serve and return. Two models – an application 
of the Bradley-Terry model (1952) proposed by McHale and 
Morton (2011) and the FiveThirtyEight model – are examples 
of paired comparison approaches. Finally, as a standard of 
reference for predictive performance, the study includes pre-
dictions from the bookmaker consensus model of Leitner, 
Zeileis, and Hornik (2009). The following sections provide a 
technical description of each forecasting approach.
2.2.1  Regression-based
Probit models. Three of the evaluated models predict 
match outcomes in professional tennis using a probit 
regression model. The basic form of the probit model is, 
() ,ij ijxπ Φβ= ′  where Φ  denotes the cumulative density 
function of a standard normal variable and xij repre -
sents a vector of predictors that could include player, 
opponent, or match characteristics. The models differ 
in the set of predictors they consider. The predictors for 
each model are listed in Table 2 and show that the only 
common predictor across all of the models was player 
rank (or seeding).
Table 1: Summary of published models for forecasting outcomes in tennis.
Shorthand   Model description (source)
Regression-based
 Logistic   Logistic with player ranking (Klaassen and Magnus 2003)
 Basic probit   Probit model with player seeding (Boulier and Stekler 1999)
 Probit plus   Probit model with player ranking and demographics (Del Corral and Prieto-Rodriguez 2010)
 Prize probit   Probit model with ranking, prize earnings, and demographics (Gilsdorf and Sukhatme 2008)
Point-based
 Basic IID   Match win probability based on IID points (Newton and Keller 2005)
 Opponent-adjusted IID  IID with opponent-adjusted point probabilities (Barnett and Clarke 2005)
 Low-level IID   IID with low-level point probabilities (Spanias and Knottenbelt 2012)
 Common opponent IID   IID with common opponent point probabilities (Knottenbelt, Spanias, and Madurska 2012)
Paired comparison
 Bradley-Terry   Bradley-Terry model of player abilities (McHale and Morton 2011)
 FiveThirtyEight   Elo rating predictions
BCM   Bookmaker consensus model (BCM) (Leitner, Zeileis, and Hornik 2009)
IID, Independent identically distributed.
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 4 ===
S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction      129
Boulier and Stekler (1999) proposed the simplest 
probit model (Basic Probit). It has the difference in seed -
ings and an indicator for an unseeded opponent as the 
only predictors. An implicit assumption of this model is 
that an unseeded player has a 50–50 chance of winning a 
match when facing another unseeded player. The authors 
found a difference in the model coefficients for men’s 
singles play at Wimbledon, so separate parameters for the 
seeding variables were obtained for Wimbledon.
Gilsdorf and Sukhatme (2008) were interested in the 
explanatory role of monetary incentives for win prob -
abilities. In their model (Prize Probit), the main predictor 
was the gap between the top prize money for the tourna-
ment and the earnings for a loss at the current stage of the 
match. Additional predictors were player and opponent 
age, head-to-head results, remaining rounds, difference 
in ATP points, difference in career match wins for matches 
played on the same surface, and an indicator for a match 
at the Masters level or above. This model had a predictive 
accuracy of 63% when applied to ATP match outcomes for 
the 2000–2001 season. Models that included interactions 
between prize money and other predictors had a minimal 
improvement on performance.
Del Corral and Prieto-Rodriguez (2010) compared 
three models with different sets of predictors. The largest 
model included the difference in player ranks, an indi-
cator for career rank within the top ten, player physical 
characteristics (height, age, and handedness), and tour -
nament factors (round, tournament level). A second model 
excluded the rank predictors, and a third model excluded 
player physical characteristics. In terms of a Brier score, 
the predictive performance of the full model was superior 
Table 2: Predictors for regression models of tennis match wins.
Variable   Logistic   Basic 
probit
  Probit 
plus
  Prize 
probit
Difference in seeds   +      
Difference in ranks     +   +  
Previous tournament result      +  
Former top 10 player       +  
Difference in age       +   +
Difference in height       +  
Handedness       +  
Potential prize earnings         +
Head-to-head wins         +
Head-to-head losses         +
Difference in rank points         +
Difference in career wins         +
Rounds remaining       +   +
Grand Slam indicator       +   +
Masters 1000 indicator         +
when applied to within- and out-of-sample datasets for 
men’s and women’s match outcomes.
Logistic model. Klaassen and Magnus (2003) consid -
ered a logit model to predict match outcomes at the begin-
ning of a match. Letting R
i be the rank of the ith player, 
who is favored to win the match, and Rj the rank of the jth 
opponent, the logistic model they propose is
 (/ (1 )) (/ ).ij ij ijlogl og RRππ θ−=  (1)
The log ratio of player rankings was the only predictor 
included in the model.
2.2.2  Point-based
Point-based models refer to a general class of tennis fore-
casting models that begin by specifying probabilities of 
winning a point on serve and return. Under an IID assump-
tion for point outcomes, the probability of winning a 
match is a function of the probabilities of winning a point 
on serve and return and can be written down in closed 
form. Newton and Keller (2005) were two of the earliest 
authors to give a full treatment of the point-based model 
along with formulae for predicting a match win given a 
player’s probabilities of winning a point on serve and 
return, with the possibility of a tiebreaker to determine set 
wins. The authors did not propose a model for the serve 
and return probabilities but only suggested consider -
ing some adjustment for opponent ability. In this paper, 
a player’s average frequency of point wins on serve and 
return in the prior 12 months are the inputs to the Newton 
and Keller formulae for match wins.
Subsequent to Newton and Keller’s seminal paper on 
the IID model for tennis win probabilities, several authors 
have considered approaches for estimating the probabili-
ties of winning a point on serve and return. Barnett and 
Clarke (2005) proposed a tournament-specific average 
adjusted for player advantage on serve and opponent 
advantage on return. Player advantage was estimated by 
how much better (or worse) a player’s serve and return 
ability was compared to the average tour player. The 
authors illustrate the use of the model for one singles 
match but did not evaluate its performance more generally.
Spanias and Knottenbelt (2012) use a state model of the 
possible events leading to a win on serve (e.g. ace, point 
win on first serve, etc.) and combine the probabilities of 
these states to get an overall estimate of the probability of 
winning a point on serve. In this “low-level” point model, 
estimates for the probabilities of each state are averaged 
over some period of recent play for each competitor with 
adjustment for opponent strength in the same fashion 
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 5 ===
130      S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
as the method proposed by Barnett and Clarke (2005). A 
similar approach can be used for estimating return win 
probabilities. The authors examined the prediction error 
of their approach for predicting matches of the 2011 ATP 
season and found that estimates based on 12  months of 
the most recent match outcomes outperformed estimates 
with 6 or 18 months of data.
Knottenbelt, Spanias, and Madurska (2012) also 
adjusted for the competitive level of a player’s opponent 
in the estimated chance a player wins a point on serve or 
return, but the authors used a different angle than Barnett 
and colleagues. Specifically, these authors used statistical 
data from a subset of matches, within a predetermined 
period, which only included matches against opponents 
who have been faced by both players being modeled, thus 
a “common opponent model.” The aim of this approach 
is to obtain the average serve and return performance of 
each player while eliminating the bias arising from the dif-
ferent mix of opponents each player has faced within the 
predetermined period. Knottenbelt et al. considered using 
the common-opponent average themselves or as inputs to 
the opponent-adjusted model of Barnett and colleagues. 
Both approaches were found to yield a positive return on 
investment for bets on the 2011 Grand Slams when esti-
mates were stratified by surface.
2.2.3  Paired comparison
One alternative class of approaches to the regression and 
point-based models is the paired comparison model. A 
popular type of paired comparison model is the Brad -
ley-Terry model, which was applied to forecasting out -
comes in tennis by McHale and Morton (2011). With this 
approach, each player has a latent match win ability, α
i. In 
the Bradley-Terry formulation the odds that the ith player 
beats the jth player is α i/αj, which corresponds to the fol -
lowing match win probability
 /( ),ij ii jπ αα α=+  (2)
the ratio of a player’s ability to the sum of the abilities in 
a given match. McHale and Morton estimate the abilities 
of professional tennis players from a likelihood of games 
won and lost between player and opponent, with an expo-
nential decay function to weigh more recent matches more 
heavily. The ability parameters are obtained by maximiz -
ing the following log-likelihood
 
()
()
() exp( () )[ () () log( )
() ].
ji ji ji jk i
ij Mi
ji ki
lt tg logg g
gl og
εα α
αα
∈
=− +−
−+
∑∑α
 (3)
In Equation (3), g ij is the total games won by the ith 
player in the jth match (j ∈ Mi), g̅j are the total games played 
in the jth match, k(i) is an index for the opponents, and ε 
is the half-life of an exponential decay function based on 
the time of the current match, t, and the previous match 
outcomes, t
j. The likelihood can be stratified by surface to 
obtain surface-specific abilities or surface effects can be 
incorporated through weighting.
Of all the methods considered in this paper, the 
approach that has been the most used in the media is the 
prediction method developed by the data journalists at 
FiveThirtyEight. Their approach is a variant of the popular 
Elo rating system (1978) that was first developed to rate 
player strength in chess and has since been adopted as a 
dynamic measure of strength in multiple sports (Stefani 
2011). The FiveThirtyEight version (2015) uses the follow -
ing recursive formula for updating the ith player’s rating,
 
ˆ(1 )( )( () () ).ii ij iE tE tK tW tπ+= +∗ −  (4)
Here, t refers to the tth match, W i(t) is an indicator of 
whether the player won, E i(t) is the player’s Elo rating at 
the start of the match, and ˆ ()ij tπ  is the Elo-based predic-
tion for a match win against the jth opponent. The para-
meter K is a function of the player’s career matches played 
at time t. If we denote these matches as m(t), then K  =  250/
(m(t) + 5)
0.4. For Grand Slam tournaments, K is multiplied 
by 1.1 to give outcomes at the majors 10% greater weight 
than all other tournaments.
The Elo prediction that the ith player wins the tth 
match, 
ˆ () ,ij tπ  is equal to
 
1
(( )( ))ˆ () 11 0, 400
ji
ij
Et Ettπ
−
 −=+  
(5)
which approaches 1 as the rating difference, E j(t) – Ei(t), 
becomes more negative. For their first match, players 
begin with a rating of E(1)  =  1500.
2.2.4  Bookmakers consensus model
For any given professional tennis match there will be mul-
tiple bookmakers who publish winning odds. These odds 
can be regarded as an expert opinion about a player’s win 
probability against a specific opponent. Leitner, Zeileis, 
and Hornik (2009) proposed aggregating these expecta-
tions into an overall prediction for match outcomes. Given 
K bookmakers for a given match, the estimated probability 
that the favored player will win is
 
1
1
ˆˆlogit () logit () .
K
ij ijk
k
Kππ −
=
= ∑
 
(6)
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 6 ===
S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction      131
The authors refer to this model as the bookmaker con-
sensus model (BCM). The derivation of the individual ˆ ijkπ  
will depend on how odds are reported by the bookmaker 
and how one corrects for the bookmaker’s profit margin 
(or overround). The present paper uses the correction 
method proposed by Shin (1993), which has been shown 
to outperform basic normalization and regression-based 
corrections (Štrumbelj 2014).
3  Methods
3.1  Parameter estimation
To allow for a fair comparison among approaches, all 
methods were estimated with data from a 52 week period. 
The period of inclusion was defined on a rolling basis 
with respect to the week of the current match so that 
the recency of the match outcomes used was consistent 
across the forecasts for the validation matches. The only 
exception to the 52 week rolling input data was for model 
predictors that specifically called for a longer look-back 
period (e.g. career wins). Player ability estimates for 
the Bradley-Terry model were based on game wins and 
were stratified by surface. Elo ratings were computed 
for match results of ATP players beginning at the start 
of the 2013 season (1 year before the earliest matches 
in the validation data described in the next section) up 
to the date of the validation match being predicted. All 
Grand Slam matches and ATP Tour matches above the 
Challenger level were included. The BCM included the 
pre-match odds of 7 bookmakers reported on www.ten -
nis-data.co.uk.
Owing to the stratification by surface of the Bradley-
Terry models, there was concern that estimates based on 
a single season might not be sufficiently stable. Thus, an 
additional version of the Bradley-Terry predictions were 
evaluated that were based on a 2-year rolling window 
(Bradley-Terry 2) rather than the 1-year rolling window 
(Bradley-Terry 1) described above. When 2 years of input 
data was used, a decay function was introduced that 
weighted outcomes that were more than 1 year from the 
date of the validation match with a weight that was one-
half the weight of outcomes within 1 year of the valida-
tion match.
Elo ratings are traditionally based on career wins and 
losses. While using only 1 year of prior performance data 
would make the Elo predictions more directly compa-
rable to the other approaches, it would not replicate the 
implementation that has been used in practice. For this 
reason, the study also includes Elo predictions based on 
career-to-date outcomes (FiveThirtyEight 2) in addition 
to those based on a single year of prior performance data 
(FiveThirtyEight 1).
A small percentage of matches for some of the 
methods did not have adequate data to estimate the 
method’s parameters. In these cases, the missing data 
was imputed to the mean among players in the same rank 
group as the player with the missing value. For this impu-
tation, players were grouped into two rank categories: 
those with an ATP rank below 100 and those with a rank 
of 100 or greater.
Data on model predictors and match outcomes were 
gathered from publicly available websites using the author’s 
R package deuce (www.github.com/skoval/deuce). All anal-
yses were conducted in the R language (R Core Team 2015). 
Estimates for the regression models were obtained from the 
modeling function glm and estimates for the Bradley-Terry 
model were fit with functions from the package Bradley -
Terry2 (Turner and Firth 2012). The predictions for each 
method and the programs used for their evaluation are 
provided as supplementary material.
3.2  Validation data
The performance of the models was tested against out -
comes for 2395 ATP singles matches played during the 
2014 season, excluding 105 matches that were walkovers 
or ended with a retirement (Table 3). Among the matches 
in the independent validation dataset, 20% occurred at a 
Grand Slam, 55% were played on hard court surfaces, and 
slightly more than half included a top 30 player. Higher 
ranked players won 68% of matches.
Table 3: Validation dataset of 2014 ATP singles matches.
Characteristic   Count   Percentage
Total matches   2395   100
Highest-ranked wins  1631   68.1
Series
 Grand Slams   482   20.1
 Masters   549   22.9
 Other   1364   57.0
Surface
 Clay   790   33.0
 Grass   287   12.0
 Hard   1318   55.0
Highest-ranked player
 Top 30   1235   51.6
 Lower-ranked   1160   48.4
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 7 ===
132      S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
3.3  Performance
Four properties of model performance were evaluated: 
prediction accuracy, calibration, log-loss, and discrimina-
tion. Prediction accuracy is the percentage of correct pre-
dictions when wins are assigned to the player in a matchup 
with the higher probability. Calibration is also a measure 
of the model accuracy but focuses on the expected wins 
across a number of matches. A probabilistic forecast is 
well calibrated if, when considering all matches for which 
the predicted probability is π, the observed proportion of 
wins is close to π. To determine if this condition is met, 
the calibration ratio is used. This ratio is the sum of the 
win probabilities of the higher-ranked player across all 
matches divided by the number of matches won by the 
higher-ranked player. When a model is well-calibrated, 
it will have a calibration ratio close to 1. A model with a 
calibration ratio greater than 1 tends to overestimate the 
wins of the highest-ranked player; a model with a ratio 
less than 1 tends to underestimate the wins of the highest-
ranked player.
A performance measure that has a direct connection 
with betting is the log-loss function. For N matches, the 
function is equal to
 
1 ˆˆLog-loss [( )( 1) (1 )]ii ii
i
Ny logy logππ−=− +− −∑
 
(7)
where yi is an indicator of whether the higher-ranked 
player won the ith match and ˆ iπ  is the corresponding 
prediction that the higher-ranked player wins. It can be 
shown that the log-loss function converges to the Kelly 
criterion when a bettor places π
i percent of their wealth 
on the ith match and ˆ .iiπ π→  A characteristic of the log-
loss function is that there is a high penalty for incorrect 
predictions made with high confidence. Thus, it is ideally 
suited for a betting context where one wants to minimize 
overconfidence on incorrect bets (Yuan et al. 2015).
The final performance measure considered is model 
discrimination. In a diagnostic setting, discrimination 
is a measure of a test’s ability to give positive results for 
true cases and negative results for non-cases. For the 
present paper, discrimination was measured as the mean 
prediction for matches higher-ranked players won minus 
the mean prediction for matches they lost (i.e. upsets), 
which is equal to the integrated discrimination improve-
ment (IDI) measure used in diagnostic settings (Pencina, 
D’ Agostino, and Vasan 2008). Higher values of the IDI 
indicate greater discriminatory power, as this would indi-
cate that model predictions tend to be more certain for 
wins than for upsets.
4  Results
Across methods, prediction accuracy ranged from 59% 
to 72% (Table 4). Models within the regression-based 
and point-based classes performed similarly, predict -
ing with 64–65% accuracy on average. Within the class 
of regression-based models, models with player ranking 
were the most accurate (Prize Probit, Probit Plus, Logis -
tic) and there was little evidence that additional predic -
tors beyond ranking improved accuracy. Within the class 
of point-based models, the Opponent Adjusted approach, 
with 67% accuracy, had the superior performance. The 
FiveThirtyEight model based on 1 year of performance 
data was more accurate than the Bradley-Terry model 
using the same input data (67% vs. 62%) and had accu -
racy that was comparable to the best-performing regres -
sion and point-based models.
Both of the paired comparison models improved 
accuracy when the amount of input data was increased. 
Across all approaches, only two models had prediction 
accuracies of 70% or greater: the BCM with 72% accuracy 
(the highest of all models) and the FiveThirtyEight model 
with 70% accuracy.
The calibration findings highlighted evidence of 
bias for several models. These included one regression 
model (Basic Probit), all point-based models save for the 
Opponent Adjusted model, and the Bradley-Terry model 
(Table 4). In each case, the bias showed that the models 
tended to underestimate the higher-ranked player’s prob-
ability of winning, predicting more upsets than were actu-
ally observed in the validation data. The bias was most 
severe for the Bradley-Terry model, where the calibration 
ratio was 0.80 whether using 1 or 2 years of data.
The BCM had the lowest log-loss of all models, indi-
cating that it was the least vulnerable to overconfident 
predictions than any other modeling approach. The 
FiveThirtyEight model (both with 1 year or career-to-date 
data) and the regression models that included player 
ranking were the next best-performing in terms of log-loss, 
all having log-losses of approximately 0.60. Relative to 
these methods, the point-based models and Bradley-Terry 
models gave more overconfident predictions.
There were only three models that had more than a 
10% separation in the mean probabilities of expected 
wins and upsets (discrimination). These were the BCM, 
with a discrimination power of 14%; the Low Level model, 
with 12%; and the FiveThirtyEight model using career-to-
date data with 11% (Table 4). As a class, the discriminatory 
ability of point-based models was approximately twice 
that of the regression-based models.
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 8 ===
S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction      133
Figure 1 summarizes the patterns in the four meas -
ures of performance across methods using the BCM as the 
performance benchmark. The patterns in performance 
between the regression-based and point-based models 
were complex. While the regression-based models that 
include player ranking tended to outperform the point-
based approaches on measures of accuracy (accuracy, 
calibration, and log-loss), point-based models had supe-
rior discriminatory ability. One point-based model, the 
Opponent Adjusted approach, was exceptional in having 
both excellent accuracy and good discriminatory ability.
The FiveThirtyEight model using 1 year of data had 
similar accuracy as the Opponent Adjusted approach but 
superior log-loss and discriminatory ability. The inclusion 
Table 4: Summary of prediction performance in 2014 ATP validation data by method type.
Method   Prediction accuracy   Calibration (95% CI)   Log-loss   Discrimination
Regression-based
 Mean   65   0.96 (0.94, 0.99)   0.61   5
 Basic probit   59   0.92 (0.88, 0.97)   0.63   3
 Prize probit   68   0.98 (0.93, 1.03)   0.61   4
 Probit plus   67   0.98 (0.93, 1.03)   0.60   7
 Logistic   67   0.97 (0.92, 1.02)   0.60   6
Point-based
 Mean   64   0.91 (0.88, 0.93)   0.66   9
 Basic IID   63   0.89 (0.85, 0.93)   0.67   7
 Opponent adjusted  67   0.98 (0.93, 1.03)   0.63   9
 Low level   64   0.87 (0.83, 0.91)   0.68   12
 Common opponent  63   0.89 (0.84, 0.93)   0.66   7
Paired comparison
 Bradley-Terry 1   62   0.80 (0.76, 0.83)   0.67   3
 Bradley-Terry 2   65   0.80 (0.76, 0.84)   0.65   3
 FiveThirtyEight 1   67   0.98 (0.93, 1.03)   0.60   9
 FiveThirtyEight 2   70   1.03 (0.98, 1.08)   0.59   11
BCM   72   0.98 (0.93, 1.03)   0.55   14
Figure 1: Performance summary – prediction accuracy, calibration, log-loss, and discrimination – for 2014 ATP validation data, as the per-
centage difference in performance from the bookmakers consensus model.
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 9 ===
134      S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
of career win-loss improved the prediction accuracy and 
discrimination of the FiveThirtyEight model predictions, 
resulting in performance that was the closest to the book-
maker predictions on all dimensions of performance. The 
performance of the FiveThirtyEight model with career-to-
date data differed from the BCM by 3–7% on measures of 
accuracy and by 20% on discriminatory ability.
Differences in the accuracy of predictive methods 
were found according to player rank, tournament level, 
and surface characteristics (Table 5). The largest differ -
ences were found between matches in which the highest-
ranked player was ranked 30 or higher versus matches 
of lower-ranked opponents. All models performed 
significantly better at predicting the outcomes of matches 
of higher-ranked players by 10–20 percentage points. 
Though smaller in magnitude, it was also found that pre-
dictions for Grand Slam matches were more accurate than 
predictions for lower-tiered tournaments; and predictions 
for grass and hard court tournaments tended to be more 
accurate than for clay court tournaments.
Predictions for the highest-ranked players based on 
the FiveThirtyEight model had good accuracy, even with 
1 year of data (Table 5). In fact, the additional career data 
did not increase the accuracy for top 30 players, which 
was 75% with 1 year or career-to-date win-loss data, but 
did improve the accuracy of predictions for lower-ranked 
Table 5: Method differences in prediction accuracy in 2014 ATP validation data by player ranking, tournament level, and surface.
Prediction accuracy 
 
Regression-based  
 
Point-based  
 
Bradley-Terry  
 
FiveThirtyEight  
 
BCM
Mean   Range Mean   Range 1   2 1   2
Player ranking
 Top 30   74   2   70   6   67   71   75   75   76
 Lower-ranked   56   18   58   5   57   58   59   64   67
Tournament level
 Grand Slams   73   7   70   6   65   65   75   74   78
 Masters 1000   66   11   65   5   65   66   70   72   72
 250 or 500   62   10   62   4   60   64   64   67   70
Surface
 Clay   63   8   61   4   60   63   66   67   70
 Grass   67   11   65   5   60   63   67   72   76
 Hard   67   10   66   5   64   66   69   71   72
Figure 2: Percentage difference in prediction accuracy from the bookmakers consensus model according to the ranking of the highest-
ranked player in the match.
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 10 ===
S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction      135
players (increased from 59% to 64%). Among methods 
using 1 year of performance data, FiveThirtyEight model 
predictions had accuracy that was most consistent with 
the BCM predictions, and the agreement in accuracy was 
even greater with career-to-date data (FiveThirtyEight 2).
Figure 2 shows the prediction accuracy of each 
method by player ranking, using the level of accuracy of 
the BCM as the benchmark for comparison. The FiveThir -
tyEight model had nearly identical performance to the 
BCM for top 30 players the most similar performance to 
the BCM for both ranking groups, but was only 88% as 
accurate for lower-ranked players with 1 year of perfor -
mance data and 96% as accurate with career-to-date data. 
While the comparative accuracy of the regression models 
with player ranking as a predictor was very similar, there 
were notable divergences among the point-based models. 
The Opponent Adjusted model had performance that was 
most comparable to the regression models. By contrast, 
the Low Level model was one of the most sensitive to the 
ranking level of the competitors, differing from the accu -
racy of the BCM by only 5% for matches with a top 30 
player but differing by 18% for all other matches.
The comparative accuracy of the models generally 
paralleled the BCM across tournament levels (Figure 3). 
There were two exceptions to this overall trend. The Probit 
Plus model was the only regression-based model that had 
excellent accuracy for Grand Slam matches but approxi-
mately 10% worse accuracy for lower-tiered tournaments. 
The Low Level model was unusual among the point-based 
models in that it differed least from the BCM accuracy for 
Masters level tournaments. The FiveThirtyEight predic -
tions using 1 year of data were the closest in accuracy to the 
BCM for Grand Slams and Masters tournaments but were 
less accurate for lower-tiered tournaments than the Prize 
Probit model. When career-to-date performance data was 
used, the accuracy of the FiveThirtyEight predictions for 
the lower-tiered tournaments improved but the accuracy 
for the higher-tiered tournaments did not notably change.
5  Discussion
This is the first study to compare the performance of pro -
posed models for forecasting tennis match wins. Using 
a large set of recent professional tennis matches to test 
the predictive performance of published approaches, it 
was found that a predictive method based on Elo ratings 
was the closest competitor to bookmaker predictions, 
correctly predicting 70% of match outcomes and outper -
forming published alternatives that included regression-
based models, point-based models, and a Bradley-Terry 
model. Among the regression models, the inclusion of 
player ranking as a predictor resulted in the best perfor -
mance and additional predictors considered by previous 
authors did not improve performance. Among the point-
based models, the approach that adjusts the serve win 
probability for player and opponent strength, according to 
how their average performance differs from the average of 
Figure 3: Percentage difference in prediction accuracy from the bookmakers consensus model according to the tournament level, from the 
highest tier (Grand Slams) to the lowest tier (250 and 500 Series).
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 11 ===
136      S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
the field, had the best predictive performance. While the 
regression-based and point-based models had compara-
ble accuracy, point-based models generally had better dis-
criminatory ability, putting them on par with the Elo and 
bookmaker predictions on this dimension of performance. 
All models were less accurate at predicting the outcomes 
of matches of lower-ranked players compared to matches 
of the top players in the sport.
Although no model was able to beat the bookmak -
ers, the Elo model developed by FiveThirtyEight was a 
close competitor and performed better than all other 
approaches in terms of accuracy and discrimination. The 
standard implementation of Elo is based on career-to-
date wins and losses, while regression- and point-based 
models have typically been done with 1 or 2 years of prior 
performance data. When only 1 year of prior performance 
data was used, the FiveThirtyEight model performance 
was comparable to regression models with player ranking 
but remained the best-performing approach for predicting 
outcomes of matches of the highest-ranked players. Thus, 
the career-to-date information contributed to its edge for a 
subset of matches but not all.
These findings provide further rationale for the wide 
use of Elo-based predictions in the media and adds tennis 
to a growing list of sports for which Elo ratings have 
proven useful (Stefani 2011; Lasek, Szlávik, and Bhulai 
2013). Still, the performance of the FiveThirtyEight might 
seem surprising given that the information it uses is fairly 
basic. The Elo ratings in this model only consider a play -
er’s past wins and losses. However, the dynamic nature of 
these ratings go further than the other approaches con-
sidered in this paper in how they reassess player ability 
and adjust for opponent strength at the time of the match. 
Unlike player rankings, that are updated weekly and rely 
on an arbitrary point system, Elo ratings are updated at 
the end of each match using a probability-based formula 
that weighs more recent performance more heavily and 
credits players for wins against more difficult opponents. 
This suggests that accounting for recency of play and 
the quality of opponents are critical elements in predict -
ing the outcome of matches at the elite level with greater 
accuracy.
A key finding of the validation study was the lack 
of performance improvement for the most predictor-rich 
regression models. Indeed, a logistic model with the 
player and opponent ranking differential as its only pre-
dictor performed as well overall as the Prize Probit and 
Probit Plus models that incorporated additional tourna-
ment and player demographic variables. In analyses not 
shown, the predictor used in the logistic model was fit 
with a probit form, which did not change the prediction 
performance, showing that the logistic performance was 
due to the predictive strength of differential ranking and 
not the choice of distributional form.
There are several reasons why the difference in 
player-opponent ranking drives the performance of the 
regression-based models. Rankings represent a rolling 
weighted sum of a player’s win-loss record in the previous 
12 months, where the weights are a scaled point system 
derived by the tour that attempts to reflect the prestige of a 
match (Irons, Buckley, and Paulden 2014). Although non-
probabilistic in nature, the ranking points are intended to 
have a high correlation with a player’s recent ability on 
the biggest stages of the calendar. There is also a potential 
“rich get richer effect” with rankings due to tournament 
seeding, as tournaments are designed to help the highest 
ranked players advance, strengthening the correlation 
between player differences in rank and match wins.
Despite the strength of player ranking in published 
regression models, the superior performance of the 
FiveThirtyEight model suggests that alternative meas -
ures of player strength might improve the performance 
of regression methods. In particular, model-based meas -
ures of player ability that account for career matches and 
adjust for opponent difficulty could be promising alterna-
tives to official rankings.
As a class, point-based models generally underesti-
mated the win probability of the higher-ranked player in 
a match, the one exception being the Opponent Adjusted 
model. There are two main modeling decisions that deter-
mine the performance of the point-based model. First, the 
choice of model for winning a point on serve; second, the 
choice of approach for predicting a match win from point 
wins. All of the point-based methods rely on IID assump -
tions for predicting match wins. The IID model, which 
assumes a constant probability of winning on serve during 
a match, is known to be incorrect but has been argued to 
be a good approximation (Klaassen and Magnus 2001). 
However, the IID has not been comprehensively tested on 
more recent professional matches, which raises the pos -
sibility that relaxing the IID model assumptions might 
reduce the bias found for point-based models.
While the point-based models had, as a group, more 
evidence of bias, they also exhibited greater discrimina-
tory ability. This suggests the conclusion of a trade-off 
in bias and discrimination with point-level information. 
However, the observation that the Opponent Adjusted 
model had good calibration and discriminatory ability 
shows that this is not an inherent trade-off of point-based 
methods, and it should be possible to improve the cali-
bration of this class of methods without sacrificing their 
discriminatory strengths.
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 12 ===
S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction      137
While the Bradley-Terry model had prediction accu -
racy that was similar to the point-based models, it showed 
the largest bias and the poorest discriminatory ability of 
all methods. Further, this bias was not remedied with the 
inclusion of an additional year of performance data. The 
Bradley-Terry model is the only approach considered here 
that utilizes game wins as the primary driver of player 
ability. Owing to the hierarchical nature of tennis, it is not 
necessary to win every point, game, or set to win a match. 
The superior performance of the Elo-based model over the 
Bradley-Terry model suggests that the focus on game-level 
measures of performance in place of overall match perfor-
mance is a less reliable measure of player ability.
Strengths of the present study include the use of an 
independent validation dataset with many matches on 
all surfaces and stages of the ATP tour above the Chal -
lenger level. However, by focusing on only 1 year of data 
it is unclear whether these findings can be generalized to 
past or future generations of players. Another limitation 
in the generalizability of the findings is that the paper did 
not consider performance for the Women’s Tennis Asso -
ciation. Further, the present paper focused on pre-match 
predictive performance and did not investigate the advan-
tages of within-match updating, which is a potentially 
unique strength of point-based models.
This work highlights a number of directions for further 
research. Proposed improvements of the Elo rating system 
have been developed but have yet to be applied in tennis 
(Glickman 1999; Herbrich, Minka, and Graepel 2006). All 
of the evaluated prediction methods were less accurate 
at predicting match outcomes for lower-ranked players 
compared to matches of the best players in the sport. This 
property could hinder the practical utility of current pre-
diction methods and the extension of these methods to the 
junior game. Further work is needed to identify stronger 
predictors of the performance of lower-ranked players. 
In this regard, it was notable that no published predic -
tion method included information about player mental 
skills or shot-level characteristics, though these are both 
thought to be important determinants of match outcomes 
(Féry and Crognier 2001; Jones 2002). It is an open ques -
tion whether either of these areas of performance could 
improve the predictive performance or generalizability of 
current methods.
The recent media scandal on match-fixing in tennis 
calls attention to the reality that the performance of pre-
diction methods in the sport is not simply an academic 
concern. For modelers to ensure that coaches and tennis 
officials are using the most appropriate available tools 
when evaluating tennis outcomes, rigorous validation 
should be a routine part of the development of tennis 
prediction methods. At present, it can be concluded that 
some published prediction models are more useful than 
others and all models have limited utility outside of the 
highest levels of the sport. The variation in model per -
formance demonstrated in this study emphasizes the 
importance of comparative validation and the need for 
continued research to improve forecasting outcomes in 
tennis.
Acknowledgments: I am grateful to Jeff Sackmann of 
Tennis Abstract and the staff at the ATP who made this 
research possible by providing large amounts of tennis 
data to the public.
References
Barnett, T. and S. R. Clarke. 2005. “Combining Player Statistics to 
Predict Outcomes of Tennis Matches.” IMA Journal of Manage-
ment Mathematics 16(2):113–120.
Boulier, B. L. and H. O. Stekler. 1999. “Are Sports Seedings Good 
Predictors?: An Evaluation.” International Journal of Forecast-
ing 15(1):83–91.
Bradley, R. A. and M. E. Terry. 1952. “Rank Analysis of Incomplete 
Block Designs: I. The Method of Paired Comparisons.” Biom-
etrika 39(3):324–345.
Del Corral, J. and J. Prieto-Rodriguez. 2010. “Are Differences in Ranks 
Good Predictors for Grand Slam Tennis Matches?” International 
Journal of Forecasting 26(3):551–563.
Elo, A. E. 1978. The Rating of Chessplayers, Past and Present. 
New York: Arco.
Féry, Y .-A. and L. Crognier. 2001. “On the Tactical Significance of 
Game Situations in Anticipating Ball Trajectories in Tennis.” 
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport 72(2):143–149.
FiveThirtyEight. 2015. “Serena Williams and the Difference between 
All-Time Great and Greatest of All Time.” http:/ /fivethirtyeight.
com/features/serena-williams-and-the-difference-between-all-
time-great-and-greatest-of-all-time/. Accessed on February 2, 
2016.
Gilsdorf, K. F. and V. A. Sukhatme. 2008. “Testing Rosen’s Sequen-
tial Elimination Tournament Model Incentives and Player Per-
formance in Professional Tennis.” Journal of Sports Economics 
9(3):287–303.
Glickman, M. E. 1999. “Parameter Estimation in Large Dynamic 
Paired Comparison Experiments.” Applied Statistics  
48(3):377–394.
Herbrich, R., T. Minka, and T. Graepel. 2006. “Trueskill(tm): A 
 Bayesian Skill Rating System.” In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pp. 569–576.
Irons, D. J., S. Buckley, and T. Paulden. 2014. “Developing an 
Improved Tennis Ranking System.” Journal of Quantitative 
Analysis in Sports 10(2):109–118.
Jones, G. 2002. “What is this Thing called mental toughness? An 
investigation of Elite Sport Performers.” Journal of Applied 
Sport Psychology 14(3):205–218.
Klaassen, F. J. and J. R. Magnus. 2001. “Are Points in Tennis 
 Independent and Identically Distributed? Evidence from a 
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
=== PAGE 13 ===
138      S.A. Kovalchik: Searching for the GOAT of tennis win prediction
Dynamic Binary Panel Data Model.” Journal of the American 
Statistical Association 96(454):500–509.
Klaassen, F. J. and J. R. Magnus. 2003. “Forecasting the Winner of 
a Tennis Match.” European Journal of Operational Research 
148(2):257–267.
Knottenbelt, W. J., D. Spanias, and A. M. Madurska. 2012. “A Com-
mon-Opponent Stochastic Model for Predicting the Outcome of 
Professional Tennis Matches.” Computers & Mathematics with 
Applications 64(12):3820–3827.
Lasek, J., Z. Szlávik, and S. Bhulai. 2013. “The Predictive Power of 
Ranking Systems in Association Football.” International Journal 
of Applied Pattern Recognition 1(1):27–46.
Leitner, C., A. Zeileis, and K. Hornik. 2009. “Is Federer Stronger in a 
Tournament without Nadal? An Evaluation of Odds and Seed-
ings for Wimbledon 2009.” Research Report Series/Department 
of Statistics and Mathematics 94.
McHale, I. and A. Morton. 2011. “A Bradley-Terry Type Model for 
Forecasting Tennis Match Results.” International Journal of 
Forecasting 27(2):619–630.
Newton, P . K. and J. B. Keller. 2005. “Probability of Winning at 
Tennis I. Theory and Data.” Studies in Applied Mathematics 
114(3):241–269.
Pencina, M. J., R. B. D’Agostino, and R. S. Vasan. 2008. “Evaluating 
the Added Predictive Ability of a New Marker: From Area under 
the Roc Curve to Reclassification and Beyond.” Statistics in 
Medicine 27(2):157–172.
R Core Team. 2015. R: A Language and Environment for Statisti-
cal Computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing.
Shin, H. S. 1993. “Measuring the Incidence of Insider Trading in a 
Market for State-Contingent Claims.” The Economic Journal 
103(420):1141–1153.
Spanias, D. and W. J. Knottenbelt. 2012. “Predicting the Outcomes of 
Tennis Matches using a Low-Level Point Model.” IMA Journal of 
Management Mathematics 24(3):311–320.
Stefani, R. 2011. “The Methodology of Officially Recognized Interna-
tional Sports Rating Systems.” Journal of Quantitative Analysis 
in Sports 7(4):10.
Štrumbelj, E. 2014. “On Determining Probability Forecasts 
from Betting Odds.” International Journal of Forecasting  
30(4):934–943.
Turner, H. and D. Firth. 2012. “Bradley-Terry Models in R: The Brad-
leyTerry2 Package.” Journal of Statistical Software 48(9):1–12.
Yuan, L.-H., A. Liu, A. Yeh, A. Kaufman, A. Reece, P . Bull, A. Franks, 
S. Wang, D. Illushin, and L. Bornn. 2015. “A Mixture-of-Mod-
elers Approach to Forecasting NCAA Tournament Outcomes.” 
Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports 11(1):13–27.
Supplemental Material: The online version of this article 
(DOI: 10.1515/jqas-2015-0059) offers supplementary material, 
available to authorized users.
Brought to you by | Victoria University Australia
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/24/17 6:00 AM
